---
permalink: /research/
title: ""
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
---

# Characterizing accreting binaries in the local universe with *Chandra* (*Spring 2020 - Present*)

X-ray observations of nearby galaxies provide one of the best laboratories in the universe for studying two exotic classes of object: black holes and neutron stars. These sources, when found in binary star systems, represent the most persistently luminous discrete sources seen in galaxies, occasionally excepting their central supermassive black holes. Observations of these X-ray binary stars allow us to study the dramatic effect these objects have on their surroundings as well as the high-energy physics involved in their emission. Both black holes and neutron stars go through cycles of emission states in their X-ray spectra which are directly related to mass accretion rate in the systems. Observing such a cycle can enable determination of the nature of a compact object as either a black hole or a neutron star. However, observing a full cycle of states, which can last from days to decades depending on the object, is prohibitively time-consuming for a large sample of objects.

Professor Roy Kilgard’s group has been working on a complete census of X-ray binaries in galaxies in the local universe. This sample comprises some 200 galaxies, 600+ observations with the Chandra X-ray Observatory, and ~45,000 discrete sources. The observations are supported by thousands of observations at other wavelengths, principally in the optical from the Hubble Space Telescope.

This summer (2020), I'll be working with Professor Kilgard to perform a detailed spectro-temporal analysis of all of the luminous binaries in this sample with the following goals: 1. Determine X-ray spectral state, a quantity tied directly to mass accretion rate. 2. Use timing analysis to search for source variability. This could be periodicity (related to binary orbit or rotation), stochastic events (e.g., X-ray bursts associated with mass accretion on the surface of neutron stars), or quasiperiodicity (tied to relativistic motion of material through the accretion disc). 3. Determine the feasibility of optical follow-up of transient source outbursts using the new 24” telescope at the Van Vleck Observatory, which will be in commissioning and testing phase this summer.

# Raytracing the Solar Gravitational Lens (SGL) with python (*Fall 2017 - Spring 2019*)

Gravitational lensing is a well-known phenomenon in observational astronomy wherein a massive object, like a galaxy or cluster of galaxies, bends the trajectory of light of a bright source located behind it, which we observe on Earth as a warping or duplication of the source on the sky. If the conditions are just right and the source, lens and observer are perfectly aligned (<i>in syzygy</i>), what we observe is called an Einstein ring, a circle of light about the limb of the lens containing highly-magnified light from the source; this alignment rarely occurs in nature.

Strong lensing is only seen occuring around very massive bodies from here on Earth, but this is simply due to the fact that the mass of a given gravitational lens is dependant on the distance from its gravitational focus. That is to say, gravitational lensing can occur for any size object, but all low-mass objects (like stars) are too far from the Earth for it to be at their gravitational focus. The Sun, even, has a gravitational focus at a minimum of ~550AU - it is this fact that the Solar Gravitational Lens (SGL) seeks to take advantage of.

The Solar Gravitational Lens (SGL) is a theoretical space telescope comprised of a modest meter-class telescope pointed at the Sun and placed at its gravitational focus. When aligned in syzygy with a target exoplanet, the resulting Einstein ring will contain highly-magnified, extreme-resolution data from the surface of the exoplanet. With the optical properties of the SGL, this is essentially equivalent to a sattelite orbiting Earth taking an image of the state of Connecticut.

From the first few weeks of my time as an undergraduate in 2017 to the end of the summer of 2019, I worked with Professor Seth Redfield on simulating the images we might see from the SGL once it is positioned, so that we may begin work on a reconstruction algorithm for converting the warped light from the Einstein rings it gathers back into an image of the source's surface. This project culminated in a general-relativistic raytracing algorithm I call <b style='font: courier'>SunTracer</b>. I decided to transition to a new project after developing SunTracer, and the deconvolutional methods for these images are being worked on by other researchers, namely by Dr. Slava Turyshev and Dr. Victor T. Toth at JPL; interested parties may read the SGL group's [NIAC Final Report](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2002.11871.pdf) (for which they [recently recieved Phase III funding](https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-selects-early-stage-technology-concepts-for-new-continued-study). Or, for a lighter read, [my paper](https://mvtea.github.io/files/tea_knac2019.pdf) from my talk on the subject at KNAC in fall of 2019.
